/	Some tentative notes about 8KBASIC and P?S/8

BASIC loads a few constants into page zero of field 1.  Beyond that is the code
stack and then the variables and push-down area that are not needed for file setup or
save.

The code stack can be quite large, especially since tokens can be expanded into longer
keywords.

Any save mechanism requires a series of TFS output files.

If they are to be specified, the name parser needs to restrict STATED name to
5 characters to allow numeric characters to be appended to create actual TFS files.

SAVE FOO

This would create FOO1,FOO2, FOO3 etc. as needed.  [Diagnostic message could indicate
how many.]


The TFS directory is loaded completely to make it easy to create the file entries
while each file is created and written, then write the directory back if dirty.

each file has a sequence number in it and the last one has a sentinel 7 in it, thus
at most 8 files.  Extended unit support via /0-/7; default is the drive BASIC was
loaded from.  all info in the last word in the file.

8K machines demand the use of 0020-0057 to store field 1 to swap in the code to
create these files by reading the code stack.  Since it is essentially linear there
should be low overhead reading it back in.  If 12K is available, it can be moved to
field 2 and the save code can still run in field 1 unchanged other than knowing where
to obtain the code stack tokens.

Field 1 should be able to do this in 2K of code intercepting the LIST command output
and placing the expanded contents into the 2K buffer in the end of field 1.

Restoration is either move the field 2 back to field 1 or read in the scratch area
into field 1.

LOAD FOO

would attempt to find file FOO1,FOO2, FOO3 etc. as available. the loading ends when
the next file cannot be located.

As the files are unpacked BASIC interprets them and builds up field 1.  Control is
returned to BASIC for further keyboard input.  There needs to be an area to place
the file unpack routines and a hopefully two page buffer to read in the tfs directory
etc.  

Better still, LOAD destroys the in field 1 stack as it was expected to be destroyed
anyway.  that way an overlay comes into field 1 that can read the entire TFS directory
and locate the FOO* files.  This would create a short list of the files to read to
be passed to an unpacker routine.  The files can be validated as a set by placing
some rear-of-file info which needs to only be the count of files and which one this
one is, thus only two words reserved at the end of the file, or even one word with
two halves.  By leaving out the name, that work falls on the code to find all files
FOO* and thus they can be renamed to BAR* and it still works.

Below is the best idea, not above!  keep track with a sentinel and an internal
checksum.


The whole thing can be done in one word:

bits[6-8] is 110 unless this is the sentinel file then 111
bits[9-11] is the index number of this file 000-111

bits[0-5] the two's complement of bits[6-11] for validation.

Thus, the string in the LOAD command makes it find FOO1 through FOO8 as necessary.
Any one of them sets up how to succeed and also how to fail for a variety of reasons:

No such file set
Not all files present in file set
all files present [diagnostic].

Created files always have line numerical contents due to the way the files are created.

It might be possible to prove a dynamic reduction can be done to use a variable-sized
input buffer instead of the number of pages of the rest of the code stack empty space
at any one time.  A problem is that parsed variable names create variables.  stack
space should be provably not deep, and certainly does not use the GOSUB stack.

But the buffer size has to be solved.  If 12K use that as the input buffer!


If at all possible, find space for P?S/8 text file buffer for passed control files to
BASIC the program.  Also needs an unpack routine but can replace the one used to
create files if can be kept separate else has to reserve some space [or use field 2 also].


In BASIC, create the illusion of 5-char file names.  Translates to TFS files named
5-char-name appended with a sequence digit 1-8 that matches an internal field 0-7 or perhaps
something a bit different sort of as above; in any case relative 0 through 7 causes the
need for the file to be named namer1 through namer8 or whatever is referred internally as
NAMER.
