Notes regarding P?S/8 console conformance rules.

Each PDP-8 operating system has a policy regarding handing off control from the
system to an application program and dealing with the system console.  On some
systems, such as OS/8, these rules are nearly non-existent.  However, because the
P?S/8 console definition is complex, there are several issues to achieve complete
conformance.

Program context.

Many P?S/8 programs are essentially executed once and exit to P?S/8 at 07600.  In
a few cases, the programs perform a warm internal restart such as BLKCPY.  It is
expected that program halts [if any] are followed only by pressing CONTINUE and
not modifying console output flags.

P?S/8 with the Logical Console Overlay disabled will generally have the console
output flag in flux when the program is started.  As such, it is generally allowed
to wait for the console output flag to raise (it might have already depending on
how slow the system device is).  At that point, the efficient method should be
used to overlap output with processing.   The notion of waiting the entire time
for the flag to raise is always discouraged.

If a program can be subject to manual restart, or for compatibility with less
rigorous systems such as OS/8, the program can start with some form of console
initialization.

The specifics will vary depending on the program; any opening message represents
an opportunity to have tight control.

If necessary, the opening message can consist of merely CR then LF.  By having an
independent opening message, the program can start with a dedicated flag sync
routine freeing all other programming to be donw with the assumption of waiting
for the flag before printing and not waiting when leaving.

The basic method is to have a time-out routine that waits for perhaps as much as
three seconds based on the cycle time of the original PDP-8.  Longer intervals
can be annoying, especially on slower machines while insufficient waiting could
garble the content.

After the flag comes up, the first character of the opening message can be sent
directly; subsequent characters can use the usual low-level subroutine that
applies to all output, etc.

If the flag does not come up during the time-out, then the first character should
be output directly using TLS.

This method can be used in P?S/8 expecting the flag will raise at the appropriate
time without the time-out effect at all.  But if manually restarted, this may be
a requirement, etc.

Programs not specifically writen for P?S/8 can ignore all other factors; however,
P?S/8 comformance expects the output routines to also check for
Control-S/Control-Q protocol.  This is why P?S/8 NEVER garbles the output when
using terminals such as the VT-100 and related protocol-driven terminals.

Logical Console and DECmate considerations.

If it is determined the computer is a DECmate, the console output routines require
an in-line modification typically carried out by once-only code.

Checking for a DECmate is easily accomplished.  Early in the initialization code,
once it is determined that the output done flag is up, this will have been
accomplished by the fact that the TSF instruction skips.  This is true on all
models.

However, on a DECmate, another attempt at TSF will NOT skip.  This is because on
the 6121 interface used in DECmates, the TSF instruction is defined as skip on
flag AND clear the flag.

If this is the case, the routines are modified to instead to unconditionally use
KRB after KSF skips.  Typical programming also uses Control-C checking by
noticing the latest character is Control-C, but is designed to perform KRS to
leave the flag up.  As such, it is impossible to signal abort by Control-C as is
the case in all PDP-8 models.

To overcome this limitation, a logical abort bit has been added to the system
kernel in the low-order bit of 07611 in memory.  When an abort condition is
noticed AND the flag cannot be left up [and even optionally on PDP-8 hardware as
a matter of choice] the program performs ISZ I (7611) just before exiting to
07600 in the normal manner.

Note: This is the principle reason why OS/8 cannot run on DECmates and instead
various weakened subsets attempt to do so, each with unique limitations, some of
which are thoroughly unaccountable caused by newer incompetent programmers
destroying code they literally didn't understand.  On one notable issue:  Various
OS/78 V4 and newer source files have a well-adorned chart proclaiming how to
perform console programming on the PDP-8 versus the DECMate.  The problem is this
chart is fallacious, thus causing even more bad coding done by naive programmers
who assumed this was factual, etc.

once any of the above considerations has been accomplished, checking for the
presence of the Logical Console Overlay must be performed.

Various system kernel bit indicate all relevant parameters of the Logical Console
Overlay.  If it is present, all calls to various devices are modified into
logical calls:

a) The Console input

b) The Console output

c) The system lineprinter output

d) The designated reverse channel of the lineprinter input [used only for
control-S/Control-Q protocol if applicable].

e) Logical interrupt handler for the above four devices; use earlier in the
interrupt skip chain to prevent confusion with interrupt handlers for the same
underlying devices that should be ignored if in conflict with the logical console
usage of the same devices.

As such, all of the considerations above are ignored; the code is replaced by
subroutine calls to designated places in extended memory as dictated by the
kernel. the underlying actual devices are solely the issue of the Overlay; the
calling program should not concern itself with any of the details.  The Overlay
itself is configurable using patch files that overlay the permanent copy of the
overlay. [Note: There is a master restore patch to nullify all changes.]

Control-C checking should use the logical abort if applicable ISZ I (7611) before
exit to 07600.  Control-S/Control-Q checking applies same as for physical console
checking, etc.

Checking the reverse channel of the lineprinter is optional unless interrupts are
enabled.  The logical output generally buffers the output and attempts to output
as many characters as possible to empty the buffer.  Because of the unique timing
characteristics of actual parallel line printers, the output flag will tend to
come up in less than 25 microseconds every time the printer hardware is available
to buffer additional characters.  When the printer is busy [generally because of
a print cycle] the flag may take many milliseconds to rais.  As such, the call
to the logical printer output always internally checks the hardware-level flag
and will process any and all characters until the flag is not up after the 20
microsecond wait [generally carried out by instruction timing].  The output
always takes a skip return if the character was processed in some manner.  The
flag will take perhaps a very long time to raise assuming the buffer is full and
 the printer is undergoing a print cycle, in which case, the flag will not raise
for perhaps a few seconds in some extreme cases.  In non-interrupt-driven
situations, it is recommended to just wait until the subroutine call takes a skip
return.  Sending a FF character should be done when appropriate; the entire page
will print fully emptying the buffer to ensure the latest page is printed.

Printer initialization must assume a partial print page has been attempted but
failed to complete.  As such, the latest usage of the lineprinter in conforming
programs must start with first establishing control of the output flag, then
outputting a FF character to establish a new page at top of form.  In real
hardware situations, this might waste a page occasionally, but when programs
are transient ahd the operating system has no overall control of this facility,
assumptions can only be made in the minimal sense.



 







   