Glossary of terms as used in the various P?S/8 help guide documents.

Please direct any typographical errors in this document to either Charles Lasner
CLASystems@gmail.com or Bob Vines bobvines00@gmail.com.

Last edit: 04-Jul-2015 cjl

Terms presented here should be consistent with the contents of the various guide
documents and related.  The master definition should be maintained here for
reference as the other documents are developed.  Eventually, all related documents
may be bound together as an overall working manual for P?S/8 users of all stripes.

Note: Due to interaction, certain terms may make reference to other portions of this
document.

 1)	System Console Device.

	This is the main operator terminal of P?S/8.  It is generally a device 03
	[for input] and device 04 [for output] combined keyboard and [typically]
	low-speed teleprinter for all system messages and the output of most
	programs run under P?S/8.

	Variations exist for the system console device such as display terminals
	[instead of hard-copy terminals] which are generally compatible with the
	original supported device, the Teletype Corp. model 33 teletype [usually the
	automatic send/receive or ASR variant] which allows low-speed paper-tape to
	be read as required.  P?S/8 includes support for a variety of console
	device variants such as the VT-100 [and compatible] family of display
	terminals as well as older models such as the VT-52 and the VT05.  [Note:
	The VT05 requires the use of the M8655 KL8-JA serial interface card with the
	fill-jumper set unless used at 300 baud or less.]  Hard-copy terminals can
	be configured for minimal support of buffer character delete acknowledgment
	or the method defined in the TOPS-10 operating system for hard-copy
	terminals [which involves surrounding all deleted characters, printed in
	reverse order as they are deleted, by a leading and trailing "\" character.

	The P?S/8 Logical Console Overlay supports several emulated terminals using
	hardware devices such as the VT8E and the PDP-12 VR-12/14 display
	oscilloscope.  Certain support parameters can be tailored for use with these
	devices as required.

	Because P?S/8 supports an absolute standard for the console device, all
	conforming programs need not be involved in the details of the support.
	Programs that are non-conforming may have limited compatibility with only
	certain console devices and/or machine models.  [Note: Many older programs
	cannot be executed on DECmate systems unless the internal console routines
	are upgraded to full P?S/8 conformance.  Example programs are available to
	illustrate what is required.]

2)	System Line Printer.

	The system line printer is an optional component of any P?S/8 system,
	generally consisting of a high-speed hard-copy printing unit connected by a
	separate interface.  The standard device is device 66 with a parallel
	interface that conforms to Centronics parallel and related standards as made
	by a variety of companies such as Data Products [both with and without DEC
	branding that changes little to no internal components].  [Note: DEC sold a
	Centronics printer with the DEC branding on the outside and a cooling fan
	removed from the inside; no other changes were made to the device.  Clever
	users saved money purchasing the Centronics variant.]

	P?S/8 universally supports the device 66 line printer as necessary.  Other
	variations can be supported through customization of the Logical Console
	Overlay, which allows flexible support of other devices including serial
	printers that require reverse-channel flow-control support by the use of the
	Control-S/Control-Q industry-standard protocol.  The device 66 support is
	generally enhanced by the use of software buffering which can cause
	dramatic improvement of printing throughput especially on higher speed
	models.  [By way of comparison, OS/8 cannot drive a device 66 line printer
	beyond 300 lines per minute (LPM) while P?S/8, with the Logical Console
	Overlay enabled, has successfully printed on suitable printers at over 1200
	LPM.]

	Note: Many older programs cannot support printers other than the device 66
	standard models.  By conforming with P?S/8 standards, any program can be
	made to work with all supported printers.  [As in the case of the P?S/8
	system console, example programs are available to illustrate what is
	required.]

 3)	Core image [or core-image when used as an adjective].

	Core image refers to data stored on blocks of storage where entire pages of
	program or other data are presented in 128 word units meant to be loaded
	into various memory locations.  Specific loading of groups of core image
	blocks is determined outside of the core image data such as within directory
	or other complex file structures that manage loading and mapping issues.

	Core images stored in order of adjacency by loading address are the most
	efficient form of direct binary storage for executable programs assuming the
	operating system maintains relevant loading parameters [such as the P?S/8
	system program directory].

	P?S/8 system programs are stored in core-image form for at least the first
	load segment of fully adjacent storage blocks; additional segments may be
	defined by the program for additional purposes such as program or data
	overlays.

	Binary files are not core-image files; however, binary files can be loaded
	into memory and saved into system blocks 0020-0057 which is a core image of
	all of field 0.  Once saved, various utilities exist to interact with the
	core image saved in these blocks which are referred to as the system scratch
	area.

	It is possible to save core-image files in P?S/8 by using two separate save
	operations as required.  P?S/8 supports positional files that are each one
	half of this area.  % is the name of the file that is stored in blocks
	0020-0037 and $ is the name of the file that is stored in blocks 0040-0057.
	[Note: These files can be used for a variety of purposes; all usage that is
	incompatible with the core image must be avoided while the current active
	core image is in effect.  The contents of % and $ can be loaded [separately]
	into the tentative file buffer and saved to two named files in the TFS
	directory.  Work on the core image can resume at a later time by restoration
	of the % and $ files.

	A debugging session may be initiated with P?S/8 ODT which will use the
	system scratch area as a virtual image of locations 00000-07577.  [Locations
	07600-07777 are the system kernel and are generally off-limits other than
	certain system parameters that can be used only by fully conforming
	programs.]  All references to extended memory are directly to memory.  The
	user is warned that certain programs will also access extended memory such
	as the P?S/8 PAL assembler.  As such, extended memory loading should be
	considered transient at best.  [Note: The P?S/8 BSAVE utility can save any
	collection of memory locations to a series of binary output files.  The
	storage saved need not be block-oriented or even adjacent; individual memory
	locations can be saved as desired.]  At any time, the core image can again
	be saved or restored using % and $ and two named TFS files as described
	above.

	P?S/8 does not provide a means to directly create system programs.  A
	thorough knowledge of P?S/8 is required to create system programs on a
	permanent basis; future releases may provide a utility to transfer
	core-image data to designated blocks within the system directory.  However,
	only advanced users will be technically qualified to take advantage of the
	overlay facility available within the system program directory.  A complete
	understanding of the internal workings of P?S/8 execution and interaction
	with the system program directory and the system device handler is a
	necessary prerequisite.  Advanced information on this topic will be made
	available in various forms covering P?S/8 principles of operation.

	Note: Long-term plans for P?S/8 include a system builder program that will
	be able to either create or update a P?S/8 system based on features not
	presently implemented [but planned].  Such a utility will be required to
	simplify the process of modifying the system program directory and related
	structures.

 4)	Slurp loader.

	P?S/8 binary files are designed for rapid loading; the relative storage
	efficiency approaches 6/7 of core-image yet imposes no block structure.

	All P?S/8 systems can load binary files by the use of a virtual loader that
	operates in a manner analogous to the OS/8 ABSLDR program.  This allows
	device-independent binary loading on all configurations.

	Certain configurations support the slurp loader, a hardware-dependent loader
	capable of faster loading without a block-oriented buffer.  Since the loader
	is wholly contained within the system kernel area, there is no need to
	implement protective virtual mechanisms as used in the standard virtual
	loader.  The data is obtained directly from the file blocks in binary loader
	format a word at a time.

	Slurp loading can only be accomplished on program-transfer devices such as
	the RX01/RX02 and the specific three-cycle data break devices DF32 and
	TC01/TC08/TU55/TU56.  [Note: The RF08 transfers too quickly to support a
	slurp loader; the standard virtual loader must be used.]  In the case of the
	supported three-cycle data break devices, the DMA is diverted into a
	one-word buffer as the transfer progresses allowing the binary data to be
	loaded in real time.  Since there are no protective virtual mechanisms, the
	slurp loader can operate with storage devices write-protected [where
	applicable].

	The virtual loader operates with the system device handler always resident.
	The slurp loader displaces the system device handler during the loading
	process; however, a device-dependent bootstrap is included to allow system
	restart at 07600.

	An advanced feature of the slurp loader is a companion "file" created in
	binary loading format to be used after all user program loading is finished.
	This "file" modifies the slurp loader in real time to cause the system
	device handler to be reloaded without disturbing user memory [00000-07577].
	Since this "file" must be loaded last [and is extremely system-dependent] it
	is written to the reserved system block 0060.  [Note: Binary files are
	usually 16 block TFS files or perhaps some form of extended-length binary
	file since the binary loading format supports an explicit internal end of
	load condition.]  The "file" that reloads the system device handler is always
	definable in a single block.  [Note: This has been the case to date; it is
	not expected this will ever become a problem for future devices.]  To ensure
	the "file" is loaded last, it is passed internally past all user-specified
	files as block 0060.  [Note: The present definition of the logical unit for
	the reload "file" is the logical unit of the P?S/8 BIN program that loads
	the binary file.  Future releases will use block 0060 of the system boot
	device.  This will prevent potential problems such as running BIN from an
	incompatible system such as a TD8E P?S/8 system while booted to a TC08
	system; the system-dependent bootstrap code and slurp loader will also be
	moved to a dedicated system block to avoid the analogous issues.  As a
	result, future releases of the P?S/8 BIN program will be one block shorter,
	all other things equal.]

	Since the "file" must be passed when the reload feature is selected [by the
	use of the /I command-line switch], the effective maximum user-selected
	binary file count drops from 17 to 16.  [Note: The /I option is ignored on
	systems that do not support a slurp loader; the system device handler
	participates in the virtual loading processes and is never displaced from
	memory, thus does not require reloading.]

	Slurp loaders exist for other PDP-8 operating systems such as the R-L
	Monitor System [that P?S/8 is based on], POLY BASIC [sold by DEC as
	EDUsystem 30 and EDUsystem 15/30 for the TD8E] and DIBOL-8 [the forerunner
	to COS-300/310 which is actually the R-L Monitor System thinly "disguised"
	which includes the identical BIN program code within the R-L Monitor
	System].

 4)	System kernel area.

	All PDP-8 software design conventions are based on the reservation of the
	highest 128-word area in memory in the basic 4K model [07600-07777].  The
	earliest systems reserve most of this page in various ways to create
	specific paper-tape conventions since these systems had no storage devices.
	The Read-In-Mode [RIM] loader is defined as exactly 07756-07776.  This is
	the smallest practical loader that can be loaded at the top of memory.

	This set of locations was not chosen capriciously as while the basic
	paper-tape conventions were being formed, locations 07750-07755 were
	reserved for three-cycle data break devices that were in the early stages of
	development:

	a) Locations 07750-07751 are reserved for the DF32 mini-disk platter and the
	   larger RF08 disk platter storage devices [which cannot co-exist].  As
	   with all three-cycle data break [DMA] designs, the lower address [07750]
	   is used as the word count for the DMA transfer, allowing a transfer size
	   of 1 through 4096 words anywhere in the 32K memory space.  [Registers
	   within the disk controllers control the DMA memory field.]

	   The higher address [07751] is used as the current address register, which
	   must be initialized to one less than the desired transfer address within
	   the selected memory field.  As the DMA transfers occur, but memory
	   addresses auto-increment causing read [or write] operations between the
	   disk controller and PDP-8 memory.  When the word count overflows, the
	   latest transfer will be the last one made.

	   The P?S/8 slurp loader for DF32 manipulates the word count and current
	   address register to effectively always transfer into the same word; this
	   allows loading into the rest of memory [outside of the system kernel
	   sometimes known as the user memory space] without the use of a dedicated
	   buffer space and additional programming which in turn requires virtual
	   loading techniques which involves the use of reserved storage blocks and
	   significant overhead.  [The virtual loader is standard for all P?S/8
	   configurations.]

	   Users of the RF08 must use the standard virtual loader as the RF08 DMA
	   rate exceeds the capability of any slurp loader design to manipulate the
	   word count and current address registers.

	b) Locations 07752 and 07753 perform the corresponding function for various
	   three-cycle magnetic tape controllers such as the TC58.

	c) Locations 07754 and 07755 perform the corresponding function for the
	   TC01 or TC08 DECtape controller.  Due to the serial access limitations of
	   DECtape, the TC01/TC08/TU55/TU56 variant of the slurp loader operates at
	   profoundly faster speeds than the standard virtual loader, especially if
	   the binary files are located on the same drive as the scratch area used
	   to carry out the virtual buffering.  [Note: The exact blocks used for the
	   virtual buffering is a design feature of the P?S/8 BIN program that
	   launches either the standard virtual loader or the slurp loader; this
	   portion of P?S/8 is undergoing design changes.]

	As such, the RIM loader starts just after the locations reserved for the
	three-cycle DMA devices [07756].

	Closer to the beginning of the reserved page, the companion BIN loader is
	loaded; they are designed to loaded as a set.  [If the BIN loader is
	destroyed in memory, the RIM loader can be used to load in a copy of the BIN
	loader in RIM loader format, which is less efficient and does not use
	checksum protection.]  [Note: Certain programs are known to destroy all of
	memory other than 07756-07777.]

	The RIM loader was carefully written to fit into the available memory space
	leaving 07777 available.  Since the BIN loader is subject to change, the
	contents of location 07777 are set to a JMP instruction to the actual
	starting address of the particular BIN loader currently in memory; thus, the
	standard starting address of the BIN loader is always stated at 07777.
	[Note: At least four versions of the BIN loader have been released, each
	with a slightly different memory layout and certain incompatibilities with
	each other.  Additionally, all versions released by DEC have some issues
	with potential destruction by the execution of programs written for the
	various three-cycle DMA devices.  P?S/8 is undergoing some redesign to
	eliminate the last vestige of this problem in the version of BIN placed in
	memory by the P?S/8 BIN program; currently, location 07753 must be
	maintained to avoid program corruption while all DEC releases can be
	corrupted by the destruction of various locations within the three-cycle
	reserved area.  Since the TC58 magnetic tape and related controllers are
	relatively rare, this has been considered the best overall compromise.  Due
	to other changes in the design of P?S/8, this last restriction will be
	lifted in the next new release.]

	When block-oriented storage devices [such as DECtape] were introduced,
	additional standards were imposed:

	a) Programs loaded by the operating system have the ability to exit back to
	   the operating systems.  The address chosen for this purpose is 07600, the
	   lowest memory location of the last page of memory in the standard
	   configuration of 4K memory.

	b) The entire page of memory is reserved for the implementation of the
	   system kernel.  [As a practical matter, this is only a few memory
	   locations larger than is typically reserved by RIM and the most common
	   variety of the BIN loader.]

	Various locations within the system kernel [normally resident in 07600-07777
	but occasionally displaced; see below] are reserved for optional data to be
	passed to conforming programs loaded into the user memory space [and
	possibly any available extended memory locations].  [Particulars regarding
	the various options available to programs are documented elsewhere.]

	The P?S/8 BIN program provides a means to support binary paper-tape; this is
	selected by the use of various command-line options.  Most notably, the
	low-speed or high-speed reader options can be selected.  [Note: The RIM
	loader is available as a low-speed or a high-speed version.  Stand-alone
	systems require toggling in the desired version on the front panel.  When
	running from P?S/8, either can be selected by appropriate command-line
	option switches.  Most BIN loaders are designed for stand-alone usage; as
	such, the front panel switches must be available to determine the choice of
	reader to load binary paper-tapes from; this can be problematic for certain
	machines that lack an operator's panel such as the OEM version of the
	PDP-8/M.  P?S/8 solves this problem by the use of the same option switches
	as used to select the reader for the RIM loader.  Thus, when the loaders are
	placed in memory, the selected read-in device applies to both loaders.]

	Unlike other operating systems, P?S/8 can be restarted at 07600 due to the
	smaller size of the P?S/8 version of the BIN loader.  Locations 07600
	through 07642 [future releases will limit this to 7641 to eliminate the
	remaining problem of the P?S/8 BIN loader with regard to corruption by
	loading programs that operate the TC58 magnetic tape controller] are used as
	a device-dependent bootstrap to reload the specific P?S/8 system in use.

	The system kernel code is displaced from 07600-07777 in one additional
	context.  When an implementation of the slurp loader is in use, the same
	coding as is used in with the BIN and RIM loaders is loaded into 07600
	through 07642 [07641 in future releases as discussed above].  Locations
	07643 [07642 in future releases] starts the main coding of the slurp
	loader [which may also use portions of the bootstrap area in the lowest
	addresses of the system kernel area; certain routines may be part of both
	the slurp loader and the system bootstrap].  As a rule, the slurp loader
	code does not directly depend on the contents of 07750-07754 [unless the
	slurp loader is for a particular three-cycle device such as the DF32].
	However, these locations are available during the loading process.

	Location 07756 contains the starting address of the program after all
	binary files have been loaded.  Starting field information is passed to the
	slurp loader using short sections of code and CIF CDF instructions that are
	release-dependent as determined by P?S/8 BIN and the various slurp loader
	implementations compatible with it.  [Location 07756 is used universally in
	all P?S/8 program execution to store the value passed by the particular
	usage of the =xxxx command-line option.  In the case of both variants of
	the binary file loader, the value is used as the starting location of the
	loaded program; once-only final initialization code is used to start the
	program anywhere in the 32K memory space as chosen by the user.

	As with all basic P?S/8 executable programs, locations 07757 through 07757
	are reserved for the list of file handles [starting block and logical unit]
	of each of up to 17 passed input files.  All specified input files will be
	loaded by the slurp loader; at the end of all loading, the program will be
	started up as specified in the original command-line.  [Note: The virtual
	binary loader does not displace the contents of the system kernel area; the
	system device handler is called to carry out all aspects of the buffered
	loading including reading portions of the passed input files into an input
	buffer and carrying out the virtualization of the area of memory that must
	be protected during the loading process.  The last operation of the virtual
	loader is to load the entire virtual area into memory using a call to the
	system device handler initiated from a small reserved area within the
	system kernel area known as the system loader; other internal operations of
	P?S/8 also use the system loader for various purposes such as loading in the
	BIN program that initiates the entire binary file loading process or the
	paper-tape loaders as required depending on user-specified command-line
	switches.  Further information on the particulars of the system kernel and
	the system device handler is available elsewhere as part of advanced P?S/8
	documentation.]

 5)	The system scratch/save area and the % and $ files.

	Many operations of P?S/8 depend on the saved [thus virtual] image of field 0
	to allow subsequent operations once this area is initially loaded by one of
	the binary file loader choices.

	When either of the binary file loaders has completed all file loading, the
	user-selected starting address and field are used to start the program.  If
	location 07632 is selected, the system loader starting address is chosen.

	When the binary file loaders have completed all binary file loading, the
	system loader contains a dedicated call to the system device handler to save
	all of field 0 into blocks 0020 through 0057.  [Note: If the slurp loader
	was selected for the loading process, the /I option switch must be set on
	the original command-line to P?S/8 BIN.  This option reloads the system
	device handler after loading the contents of all passed binary input files.
	As a consequence, the maximum count of input files is reduced to sixteen as
	the reloading process is carried out by a small additional loading program
	passed as a file handle (but is actually located on the reserved system
	block 0060).  If seventeen input files are required, the virtual loader must
	be used; on systems that do not support a slurp loader, /I is ignored.]

	[Note: the P?S/8 GET utility is actually an alias to P?S/8 BIN with the
	starting address set to 07632 and /I forced on unless GET /V is used.]

	Once all binary input files have been loaded and the system save area now
	contains the virtual image of all field 0 loading, additional utilities can
	now be used with the program.  [Note: All extended memory is loaded directly
	and not virtualized.  The user is warned to not run any programs that may
	use extended memory if this is required.  Conforming programs may be limited
	to the use of field 0 only by the use of the CORE 0 command.  This situation
	is somewhat superior to OS/8 which cannot guarantee the contents of any
	memory location should any program be executed.]

	The program can be debugged with P?S/8 ODT [a proper superset of OS/8
	"invisible" ODT].  The virtual image can be started with the START command.
	locations in memory can be saved into binary output files using the BSAVE
	command.  Memory can be specified down to individual memory locations or
	larger blocks of contiguous memory can be specified.  [Note: While certain
	aspects of the BSAVE command superficially resemble the OS/8 SAVE operation,
	the parameters give for saving memory with the BSAVE utility are not block
	oriented; this is due to the random-access nature of the P?S/8 binary file
	format.

	[More information is available in separate documentation for these programs
	that operate on the virtualized field 0 image when loaded into the system
	save area.]

	The system save area is universal to both the basic P?S/8 system and the
	forthcoming P?S/8 SHELL overlay.  [Switching between the two environments
	will preserve the core image.]

	In the basic system, there are two positional files not directly controlled
	by the TFS directory known as % and $.  % is defined as the first half of
	the system save area [blocks 0020-0037] and $ is defined as the second half
	of the system save area [blocks 0040-0057].  By using file loading and
	saving operations initiated by keyboard monitor commands, the saved
	core-image may be archived into two TFS files for restoration later.

	Note: % and $ have independent usage in conflict with the definition of the
	system save area where they are used in lieu of TFS files for faster access.
	The user is cautioned to only use the relevant options of the context of
	interest with respect to these files.

	For example, a small assembly-language program can be created using the
	P?S/8 keyboard monitor/editor and saved in the $ file.  P?S/8 PAL can be
	executed specifying the $ file as input and the % file as binary output.
	Option switches of P?S/8 PAL allow % [or perhaps % and $ as as a second
	file] as the designated binary output file[s] for rapid program development
	of small utilities.  This is especially useful on systems based on DECtapes
	and LINCtapes where the access time can be notably improved over using files
	stored in the TFS directory.  System options exist to save the tentative
	file buffer in the keyboard monitor/editor to the $ file when any program
	is executed and/or to load the $ file into the tentative file buffer.  This
	allows P?S/8 to vaguely resemble various implementations of BASIC with
	regard to small program development, etc.

	Once a program exceeds this small but fast environment, TFS files must be
	chosen for additional development work; however, this frees the % and $
	files for use as the system save area allowing full debugging and other
	core-image usage.

[End-of-file]
