Raspberry Pi Setup Instructions:

There are a number of steps you'll need to carry out on your Raspberry Pi to 
get it set up with the Flip Chip Tester software.

First, you need to locate a flash drive with a suitable version of Linux for 
your Pi.  Since Pi software continuously changes, you'll probably want to get 
that from your Pi vendor or www.raspberrypi.org.  NOOBS is fine.

You'll need a monitor, keyboard, and mouse at first.  Once you've got that 
running, and can log in as "pi", do the following (or whatever the equivalent 
is on your system:

Use Menu->Preferences->RasPi Configuration to:
	Check "Disabled" for serial.
	Check "Enabled" for ssh.
	In Localization->Locale, select USA for Country (or your country).
	In Localization->Timezone, select US for Area (or your area).
	In Localization->Timezone, select Pacific for Location (etc).
	In Localization->Keyboard, select United States.
	In Wifi->Country, select US.
Reboot for the new settings to take effect.

Click the Networking icon, and select an access point.  Enter the Wifi password.
Verify the networking is working by using the browser icon to fire up the 
browser and going somewhere other than the welcome page.

A variety of packages may be useful.  Here's what I found during my 
installation:
	cc, perl, and python were already present.
	vi was present, emacs was not.
	cs (C# compiler) was not.
	git was present, but svn (subversion) was not.
Of these, you will need at least cc (the C compiler), and svn.

To get them, I did these commands:
	sudo apt-get install subversion
	sudo apt-get update

In order to access the GPIO pins, you'll need a user who logs in into group 
"gpio".  I did the following:
	sudo adduser --ingroup gpio --add_extra_groups tester
I used the password "tester123", answered "Flip Chip Tester" for name, and 
just hit enter for everything else.

As a shortcut to allow my new user to use sudo, I did:
	sudo visudo
and copy-pasted the line for "pi" to make another copy, and changed the new 
line to say "tester" instead.

Use Shutdown->Log out, then log in as the new "tester" user.
Get the tester software:
	svn co http://svn.so-much-stuff.com/svn/trunk/pdp8/warren/RasPi/ .
You want the dot out there by itself!
	cd src
	make

To test an M216 module:
	./tester
Enter "1" to read a file, enter "m216.tst" for the name.
Flip the switch on the tester so that the yellow UUT power LED is NOT LIT.
Insert the module you wish to test.
Enter "4".  It should complain that UUT Power is off.
Flip the switch on the tester, and the UUT Power light should light.
Enter "4" again to confirm that initializion is working.
Enter <garbled>

Since every Pi installation comes with user "pi" set to the same password, 
let's fix that.  I used "tester123" again as the password:
	sudo passwd pi

Also, we don't need the user "pi" autologin, so use 
Menu->Prefereces->RasPi Configuration to clear the System->Log in as pi 
checkbox.

It should now be possible to ssh in as user "tester".  If that works, you can 
use the menus to Shutdown-Shutdown, or just:
	sudo halt
Remove the keyboard, mouse, and monitor, and your tester is good to go.

	Vince