



		BIOCHEMISTRY 583
		EXPERIMENTS CONCERNING PH

READING:
    1. Bates,R.G. in "Handbook of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology",
    2 nd ed.,H.A.Sober, editor,pp.J190-J193.
    2.  Bates,R.G. "Electrometric pH Determinations", in Biochem.
    library.
    3.  Robinson and Stokes, "Electrolyte Solutions" Ch. 1,12,13.
    I have a copy of this book in J-437; it is also available from
    the Chemistry Library.
    4. Bates and Acree, J. Res. Nat. Bur. Stds., 30,129-155 (1943).
    This paper is in the reserve folder in Biochemistry Library.
      Almost every year this reference disappears by the end of the
    quarter. also, it is a xerox of a xerox; if one of you wishes, go
    to the Engineering Library basement and get a new copy, the Depart-
    ment will be delighted to pay the copying charge.
    5. Bevington,P.R.,"Data Reduction and Error Analysis for the
    Physical Sciences", 1969.
       We will use this as the background reading for curve fitting
    discussion and the fitting of your data.

HOMEWORK:
       After reading the attachment, ref 1.  I want you to read
    chapters 1 and 2 of ref 2 and also pages 88,89.  Peruse chapter
    3 on liquid junction potentials so you appreciate that there is
    a problem.
       If you need more background on activity coefficients, con-
    centration scales, etc. read ref. 3 and also see me.

OBJECTIVE:
    1. Learn what pH means, how it is measured, the thermodynamic and
    operational definitions of pK, how pH of buffers varies with
    temperature and ionic strength.
    2. Learn theory and practice of least squares data analysis, part-
    icularly for non-linear models.

EXPERIMENTS:
    1. Make up a standard buffer.  I want you to see how easy this
    is.  You can do the pH 4.0 Potassium Biphthalate buffer, or
    the NBS standard of reference 4 above.  I do not require that
    you use this as the primary standard, although you may.
    2. Measure the ionic strength and temperature dependence of the
    pK of MOPS-MOPS.Na solutions.  To do this most simply, make
    equimolar mixture of the acid and base (after drying) and use
    procedure of ref 4.  Use glass electrodes and do the experiment
    in your rotation lab or whatever.  For the collection of exper-
    imental data, you may collaborate with another student.
    Compute pK and other thermodynamic parameters and compare to
    literature values (if possible).  You do not need to obtain all of
    the data at as many temperatures as were used by Bates and Acree.
    By the end of week 1, you should have an experimental plan in the
    form of a table for presentation to the class or to me.  We will
    try (in class) to criticize your plan.

REPORT:
       The write-up should be as a paper submitted to Biochem. Biophys.
    Res. Comm.  See journal for description of format.
t as many temperatures as were used by Bates and Acree.
    By the end of week 1, you should have an experimental plan in the
    form of a table for present