In consideration of the coming SHELL upgrade, try to stream-line required
low blocks so a SHELL-oriented device gets as much back as possible for SHELL
purposes yet is still basic P?S/8-compatible.  Thus, blocks 15-16 will
contain a null amount of files starting from and ending at the same somewhere
block TBD [by what else gets streamlined; an immediate goal is to get below
block 0160]

Then the stuff before the first deletable system program has to be minimized.

The new low-level monitor will increase this slightly.  It would appear it
has to check for Control-C but someone has to deal with the soft abort bit
because that would not have brought in the low-level monitor, but an actual
control-C would.  Perhaps the low-level monitor is brought in on either
control-A or control-B.  Cannot depend on any terminal being able to generate
control-break on real terminals like VT-100 so that is out.  Programs that
just exit on less than Control-D have to be modified.

In the low-level monitor, control-C detect has to join back with soft-abort
bit detect somewhere else to make sense regarding batch.

Batch might be nice to remove reserved blocks and make then relative to 
BATCH core image blocks as if overlays.

Extended-length Files Directory being scrapped.  Perhaps reorganize for the
benefit of the new RU that handles interally the extended-length file ber
logical unit being faster, but what about the ccl-like execution that has
to read in the system programs directory first half?  Somebody has to be
the most efficient.

Perhaps the ccl-like processor is just before the system programs directory
and loads in itself plus the first two while the R processor is after and
reads in all four blocks of the system programs directory and itself all
in once swoop, etc.  Then both are efficient.

Non-system handlers that support 256 word LINCtapes have to do the RK8E
trick to remain compatible fully or else be deleted forcing programs that
do LINCtapes to be special with their own LINC-8 and PDP-12 code the way
LTBODT and L6DCON work now.  No need to have both.  But all handlers have to
support logical 128-word block transfers.

